# VL109: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Psychopharmacology Algorithm (Update)

**Publication Type:** Video Lecture
**Publication Date:** 2026-04-29

## Medical Editors

**Tomás Abudarham, M.D.**

## Authors

**David Osser, M.D.**

---

# VL109 - Section 1: 10901

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

10901 RAW

Dr. David Osser

Hello! This is Dr. David Osser from Needham, Massachusetts, United States. I'm an associate professor of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and I work full time at the US Department of Veterans Affairs Hospital in Brockton, Massachusetts. Today, the topic is and I would like to welcome you to this updated lecture on a psychopharmacology algorithm for the treatment of PTSD. I'm going to present the introduction to this series of talks on this algorithm. And fasten your seatbelts. I'm about to start.

So by way of introduction, I should first mention that PTSD is associated with dysregulation of neurotransmitter, neuroendocrine, neuroen--, neuroanatomical systems in the brain. And therefore, pharmacotherapy has a potential role in its treatment but it's not necessarily first line or even necessarily needed. This algorithm is to help you if you decide to use medication, you and the patient, but is no mean--, by no means meant to imply that you should always use medication. Psychotherapeutic modalities are very important in the treatment of PTSD and may be primary.

Now, as far as how we develop these algorithms, I think you may know about that from other talks I've given on algorithms but our core, core values that we try to employ in deciding the sequence of meds in these algorithms is of course efficacy. If there are placebo-controlled trials supporting treatments, we do tend to prefer them. And also, long-term safety as well as short, ser--, term safety is important and this also helps determine the sequence of the medications.

Now, another key issue to bring up right away before going into this algorithm in any detail is that knowledge of the evidence base is necessary but not sufficient for clinical decision making. There will be instances where clinical judgment justifies deviation from what the evidence seems to suggest as we try to encapsulate that into these recommendations. It's a good idea to document the reasoning that you have, why you think this patient should not be treated with what might be the best evidence treatments because you see something unusual or special about your patient that would make them perhaps not as likely to respond to that treatment and forms the basis for your wanting to choose something else.

As far as how we arrive at these algorithms after we produce them in a draft format, we always submit them for blinded peer review at journals and we get feedback and we have to address those, that feedback, make adjustments to our recommendations to be in accord with the reviewers. And this is how we have some potential to add to the validity of our final conclusions when the paper is finally accepted. Some of these algorithms have been not submitted for peer review recently so any updates of them since the last published version will not have had that validity check but this particular algorithm, PTSD was just approved and published this year 2025. We also published a version in 2022. So this has gone through a couple of recent peer reviews so it's pretty up to date, I would say. All right.

So to proceed to introduce the algorithm, I should start by pointing out that only two medications are approved by the Food and Drug Administration for PTSD and those are paroxetine and sertraline, two SSRIs. And as such, as the only two approved medications, you will find that most other algorithms and guidelines out there recommend SSRIs first line. But our focus in this algorithm on the quality of the evidence regarding SSRIs versus other medications being used and studied in PTSD led us to actually propose a treatment sequence that starts with treating sleep disturbance first usually with prazosin. So to that extent, our algorithm is significantly different from some of the other guidelines out there and you'll hear the full justification for that in the course of this series of talks as I present the whole algorithm. But in this introduction today, I'm only going to start by giving you a bird's eye view overview of the whole algorithm. I'm just going to show you the flow chart, tell you what's in it and then in subsequent meetings I'll be going over each step again explaining the evidence base and hopefully responding to questions that might have come up in your mind as you hear about the basic algorithm.

So to give that quick summary, the first step is to confirm that the patient meets criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder in the DSM-5-TR because virtually all the evidence that we're looking at of psychopharm studies involves studies that recruited patients that met those criteria. So if you want to be in accord with the science, you kind of have to diagnose in the same way as the people do who go into when, when they're diagnosed to be in studies. Any other method of diagnosis will leave you out in the cold because you won't have any evidence to cite on what would work. You'd only know your own experience to the extent that's helpful for people who meet some other criteria. So you confirm the diagnosis. 

And then you also as part of the diagnostic process assess for comorbidities because there frequently are several other disorders going on at the same time as your PTSD and the presence of those may make some alteration in your basic approach. So step 1A of the algorithm is to see if they have substance use disorders, bipolar disorder, a psychosis, major depression, have dissociative symptoms or it's a woman who is pregnant or could become pregnant. So for all of those comorbidities, we have a table in the papers talking about specific instructions relative to treatment if they have one or more of those comorbidities but I'm not going to go into them in this introduction. 

But having reviewed that, the basic algorithm begins with making a determination if sleep is one of the problems they're having. And from 70% to 90% of people with PTSD do have sleep problems. Some consider this the hallmark of PTSD, the most likely area where you will find pathology that the patient will be complaining of. It's in the population I see at our Veterans Hospital. It seems to me pretty much universal that everyone with PTSD has some level of insomnia.

So there are two kinds of insomnia that would be of concern. One is problems falling asleep, the onset of sleep which is to the right there. And if that's the only problem with their sleep, then we would try hydroxyzine as our first-line anti-insomnia agent for this population. And also, we would consider trazodone or clonidine. They're, clo--, trazodone is very frequently used but has actually no placebo-controlled trials in PTSD so we rank it a little lower. Hydroxyzine has one trial and clonidine has experience backing it but again no placebo-controlled trials in this population. Now, on the other side of the algorithm you see, what if the problem with sleep is problem staying asleep, waking up due to nightmares or disturbed awakenings as a result of hyperarousal? Then our first recommendation for this patient is prazosin. Some people pronounce it prazosin, prazosin. I think they're all correct but I happen to prefer prazosin for no good reason. But anyway, you try that. That's our first medication for this patient with PTSD. But the other option on the question, was sleep improved, was either it wasn't improved or the ability to fall or stay asleep, I'm sorry, the ability to stay asleep was improved but they still have trouble falling asleep, then the arrow takes you to the same place where if they had trouble falling asleep as their main problem which is to try hydroxyzine, trazodone or clonidine. All right.

And if the sleep was improved, you're then ready to go down to the next step which is asking if this has taken care of their major PTSD symptoms as well while the sleep was improved. If not though, if there are significant remaining PTSD symptoms, you'll go on to a trial of an SSRI as our first-line next medication. But the other option on the question, was sleep improved, was either it wasn't improved or the ability to fall or stay asleep, I'm sorry, the ability to stay asleep was improved but they still have trouble falling asleep, then the arrow takes you to the same place where if they had trouble falling asleep as their main problem which is to try hydroxyzine, trazodone or clonidine. All right.

So going back down to the SSRI trial, have you given an adequate trial of an SSRI is our question. We have some parameters for that. If the answer is yes, then the question is, what was the response? And there are several possibilities but the other possibility is you haven't given an adequate trial or they've got ki--, co--, bipolar disorder. If they don't have bipolar and they have not had a trial of an SSRI, then we recommend one. All right.

So what happened with that trial? Three possibilities. They could've had no response and this is a patient without comorbid psychosis. Or they could've had no response and there is psychosis present. Now, you can get psychosis with PTSD. You do have to determine if it's not due to another disorder where the psychotic symptoms are primary like schizophrenia. Then the algorithm would not apply. You should be using your schizophrenia algorithm. But there are psychotic symptoms associated with PTSD. I'll say more about that later. And in that case, we recommend adding an antipsychotic, probably perphenazi--, I'm sorry, probably aripiprazole is the recommendation. I'll explain that in more detail later. Notice that we did recommend an SSRI even if they had psychosis to be tried first because sometimes the psychosis will improve when you treat the whole syndrome of PTSD with psychosis. But if it does not, if the psychosis is still present, then we would add an antipsychotic.

But another possible answer to the question, was there a response to the antidepressant, could be there was no response and there was no psychosis present. So what will we give for our second trial of a medication for the remaining symptoms of PTSD after you tried your prazosin for, or otherwise treated the sleep problem? And if the answer is you have not tried a second med, then we would recommend trying a second different SSRI or you could try an SNRI. We'll say much more about the considerations with that. And if the answer is there was response, then you would maintain the patient on that.

But if not, you could go to your third trial which is yet another choice from among SSRIs, SNRIs. Or if you haven't tried it yet, you could try prazosin in the daytime. You might have wound up doing that right at the beginning when you were trying to treat sleep. You may have given some during the day. Some people might choose to do that. It's not terribly well established as a daytime treatment but there is a moderate amount of evidence that it can work for regular daytime symptoms. So we're having it here as an option formally for the third trial if you didn't try it earlier. And the last option if the, about response to the SSRIs, what if it was a partial response, then we have a variety of augmentation options and other monotherapies which I will be describing in more detail when I go through the steps in more detail in the next several talks.

So this concludes the introduction. I'd want to repeat the key points that I've just made. The first is that this algorithm is meant to help clinicians decide what to prescribe for second and third if you and the patient agree to try medication. But it should not be taken to imply that we think you should always use medication or that if it is used it would be first line over psychotherapy. In this introduction, we presented a brief bird's eye overview of the whole algorithm. In subsequent videos, we're going to go over it again step by step, explaining the reasoning and showing the evidence supporting the reasoning. The most important though and for some clinicians perhaps new aspect of this algorithm compared to other guidelines that are out there is the emphasis on the use of prazosin early because it has the strongest evidence of efficacy and safety for PTSD particularly for sleep.

---

# VL109 - Section 2: 10902

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

In this section of the PTSD algorithm, we're going to talk about the differential diagnosis of other conditions that they could have as well as the PTSD and the importance of comorbidities and having those clearly delineated before you make your treatment choice.

So first of all, you will make your diagnosis of PTSD by the DSM-5-TR criteria which are the same as the DSM-5 criteria and pretty much the same as the DSM-4 criteria. A few little minor changes were made. So we see no reason for you to do anything other than go by those criteria. So that part is straightforward. Now, if comorbidities are present, they may alter the algorithm. So we're going to talk a little about several comorbidities – substance use disorder, depression, bipolar disorder, psychosis and women who have the potential to become pregnant or who are pregnant now.

So first of all, I think I mentioned this in a previous talk but it's worth reiterating that virtually all psychopharm studies of PTSD require that patients meet the criteria for PTSD in the DSM for entry into the studies. So the evidence base is extremely strongly tied to these criteria. If you're using some other method of diagnosing PTSD, any recommendations in this talk will be less reliable or perhaps unreliable. Okay.

So going into the substance use issues among the comorbidities, first of all, we generally want to avoid benzodiazepines with PTSD and substance use disorders. Almost everybody agrees benzodiazepines should be avoided as a treatment when you have people with substance use disorders. And they don't have much place in the algorithm even if you don't have substance use disorders but particularly if you do. Now, are there any special considerations for treatment if they have substance use disorders? Well, there's one small positive study with substance use disorder of alcohol use disorder. And desipramine had some particular benefit in that group. Very surprising 'cause desipramine did not beat placebo as a treatment for PTSD in a controlled study in people who did not have substance use disorders. So we really don't know what to make of this. This is a small study. It needs replication but for completeness we're mentioning it. Another drug that may have a special use when there are substance use disorders with your PTSD is topiramate. In a small study of alcohol use disorder patients with PTSD, topiramate at a dose of 300 was helpful compared to placebo. And there are, there is some evidence of topiramate being useful in PTSD people without substance use disorders. I'll mention it in one of the later sections of this lecture.

Now, what about if they have alcohol use disorder? Let's talk about that one, that substance use problem a little more because there's quite a bit of interesting study going on with that group. There's been interest in whether prazosin, which is as you already know a primary treatment we're going to be recommending for PTSD, there has been interest in prazosin as a treatment for alcohol use disorder to prevent relapse. And for example, in a study in 2020, they found that prazosin may attenuate stress cue-induced alcohol cravings and anxiety during early abstinence from alcohol and also improved stress sim--, system function. In another study in 2021, prazosin people had, who were displaying the more intense withdrawal symptoms from their alcohol had the most benefit from prazosin as a preventative and reducing subsequent drinking. And so that was also an interesting hint in that study. But overall, previous studies in patient, patients with PTSD who were actively drinking, it didn't seem that prazosin was effective in a study by Raskind. However, newer evidence found in a study from just a few years ago that, actually 2023--

By the way, I see an error in the notes here. Reference 3 should be 4 and vice versa.

Anyway, newer evidence found benefit in preventing drinking in a subgroup of drinkers who had PTSD and high blood pressure which Dr. Raskind called the hyperadrenergic sub-cohort of PTSD patients. So while prazosin may not be that useful overall in large populations of people who drink, the group that has PTSD and they're drinking presumably in part due to that, maybe to self-medicate it, they may get benefit from prazosin, both for their drinking and for their PTSD. So that is an area where we're, very, following very closely to see what new research comes out. Okay.

So the next comorbidity to briefly discuss is major depression, very common with PTSD. If you had a depression before you got traumatized, you're at higher risk of developing PTSD. So what does this mean for treatment? Well, you'd think that if you had both depression and PTSD, you could kill two birds with one stone with antidepressants but unfortunately it has not worked that way. If you have both diagnoses, you don't respond to antidepressants as well as when you have just depression alone. And we think that a lot of the depression that's going along with PTSD is secondary to it. In other words, it developed after the PTSD and as a consequence of the PTSD and treating the PTSD is what's going to help with the depression, maybe even with prazosin. More to say about that later. Okay.

Next comorbidity to mention is bipolar disorder. It is important to screen for it in people with PTSD. It seems that they have a higher rate of PTSD when they have bipolar disorder. Maybe they get themselves into trouble during their manias or their depressions and then they develop PTSD more likely than others. So how does this affect the algorithm if they have comorbid bipolar? Well, I think the obvious answer is that where we're going to recommend antidepressants, you probably do want to avoid them and skip to other options at the points where we do recommend them in the algorithm. All right.

The next comorbidity is psychotic symptoms. As I mentioned when I was going over the algorithm in the bird's eye view in the last session, there are some people with PTSD who have psychotic symptoms. So you need to assess those. Do they have a comorbid primary psychotic disorder like schizophrenia or possibly even mania with psychotic features, possibly in an older patient psychosis associated with a dementia? Anyway, if they do have other causes of their psychosis, you should probably treat in accord with the best evidence for treating those other disorders? But there also is PTSD-related psychosis. I'll have a slide later on examples of it but basically, it's when you can directly connect the psychotic symptoms they're having, the voices they're hearing or the delusions they're having directly with the trauma that they've experienced and the onset of those psychotic symptoms re--, was similar to the onset of the PTSD and after the trauma. Then it could be PTSD with the specifier of psychotic symptoms. If they have that, we would consider skipping the sleep phase of the algorithm and move more directly to an SSRI and if that doesn't work to adding an antipsychotic. And as I'll be saying later of the various antipsychotics, I'll go over all the evidence but we're thinking aripiprazole would be your first choice.

Now, the next comorbidity, it's not really a comorbidity, it's a condition, is person at risk for pregnancy. How would that affect the algorithm? Well, one of the two FDA antidepressants, paroxetine, is schedule D according to the FDA in the United States because of a firm history that it can cause cardiac septal defects in the fetus. Now, they're not using this rating system with letters anymore but, this rating was given some time ago, D meant that there's something specific that has been found. So we certainly don't want to use paroxetine for this group of patients. Fluoxetine though, though not one of the FDA-approved meds may have comparable risks according to a re--, more recent review of the evidence on these risks. So if you're thinking of that, I would avoid that also. But you could consider sertraline.

All right. That concludes the discussion of comorbidities that might affect the main algorithm. Next section, we're going to talk about the first step of the actual algorithm now that you've made all the diagnostic evaluations necessary but I'll just conclude with a few brief summary points from today's section.

Number 1, careful diagnosis of the PTSD and associated comorbidities is essential for arriving at the best treatment recommendations with meds. We discussed the implications of comorbid substance use disorders with special emphasis on alcohol use disorder where there's quite a bit of new interest, comorbid bipolar, comorbid psychosis and women of childbearing potential. With the substance use disorders, you will generally avoid benzodiazepines where they might appear in the algorithm and they don't appear very much. And with alcohol though, there is an important subgroup of patients whose alcohol use as well as their PTSD could be responsive to prazosin particularly those who have high blood pressure and rapid pulse. For the people with bipolar, we would avoid antidepressants where they occur in the algorithm and move on to other options. And for psychosis that's part of PTSD, you may need to add an antipsychotic. And for women who be--, could become pregnant, we avoid paroxetine despite its FDA approval for this diagnosis.

---

# VL109 - Section 3: 10903

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

This is section 3 or the third section of this algorithm on treatment of PTSD with psychopharmacology. And in this step, we are ready to begin the main algorithm. You've already reviewed the various diagnoses and comorbidities and how that would affect things. So now, you're ready to ask the number 1, first question for a person who has PTSD and you're thinking of treatment, is the sleep disturbed? It amazes me how often people don't do that. So they don't discover that their patient is having nightmares, disturbed awakenings and so on because they didn't even ask. We think that should be your routine first question. Now, there are lots of reasons why people can't sleep though. This is not a simple question. There's a huge differential on what's causing sleep disturbance and you have to consider what else is causing, could be causing it. You have to rule out and address the various contributing factors in their poor sleep.

And then having done that, if the remaining problems are there and seem to be due to PTSD, you're ready to try our recommendation for treating sleep problems with PTSD. But first, you have to see if they have sleep apnea. A large number of people have that. If they are excessive caffeine users, that's often a factor because from their PTSD, they can't sleep so they're exhausted every morning from poor quality sleep or many mornings and their remedy for that is to drink up to a pot or even two pots of coffee in the morning. I do ha--, had a patient who drank two pots, two 12-cup pots of coffee to get going. That's what he required. You can imagine that he had wicked withdrawal from caffeine when he tried to reduce that amount with headaches, etc. So once you're using large amounts of caffeine, it's very hard to stop doing so. But their motivation is that they're just so tired. Now, sleep apnea can also make you tired so you, you definitely have to have ruled that out or dealt with it.

Then there are poor sleep hygiene issues like not exercising super vigorously just before bed. I had this patient who had a, in his room he keeps his treadmill right next to his bed. And he has serious problems sleeping. So his remedy for it has been to go on that treadmill and work himself into a gigantic sweat and then leap on to his bed from the treadmill thinking he'll now be able to drop off to sleep except it doesn't work. But he thinks it should work so he keeps doing it. Restless legs syndrome, a very common problem out there that impairs sleep and its related periodic limb movements of sleep where they keep moving even after you're asleep. Sleep study will help diagnose that. And then, there's a lot of medical problems associated with sleep fragmentation like pain, nocturia from frequent needing to urinate. These can seriously impair your sleep.

And then one of my favorite ones to ask about is nicotine withdrawal. They smoke a pack a day or a pack and a half or two packs a day. Are they going to be able to sleep through the night without awakening with no--, you know, going abstinent on caffeine for hours when they're chain smoking all day? Of course not. So what happens is after a few hours they wake up. They may not be conscious that it has anything to do with nicotine withdrawal but they definitely can't get back to sleep. They don't feel rested. Something's wrong. And they discovered that if they get up and smoke a cigarette, they can go back to sleep. Now, I ask you, what's the treatment for that if that's, that's what's going on? Is it, is it quetiapine? Some of my colleagues seem to think that's the treatment for some of these patients because they didn't discover what the actual cause was of why they're awakening. They just gave them their favorite sleeping potion which often is quetiapine. Anyway, so you have to go through this sleep routine to be sure you've diagnosed it properly, the various causes and treat the different causes as needed.

But having done that, you now have remaining sleep problems. So is it PTSD? Well, what are the components of sleep disturbance in people with PTSD? Well, first of all, there's great difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep. As far as maintaining sleep, the first thing, I think everyone knows about this that you can get trauma-related nightmares. Now, a lot of people are not clear on the definition of a nightmare. They may just, they say, well, I get bad dreams but not nightmares. So you'll have to do a little effort to be sure they understand what you mean. It's something that wakes you up, is unpleasant and it's hard to get back to sleep. That's a fairly broad definition which will include bad dreams. But the key thing is, is the subject, ask about the subject of the dreams. What are they dreaming about? Is it the same nightmare over and over? Or is it si--, similar themes? And the themes can vary over time though. And people may have had a series of traumas and, and they're having nightmares about their original traumas early on then they get some additional trauma and now, their nightmares now incorporate the more recent traumas. But it's always about traumas in some form or other. And it wakes them up and it's very ga--, hard to get back to sleep. Always ask, how long does it take to get back to sleep? Wa--, what do you have to do to get back to sleep? This helps understand the extent of the problem. And for many people, at least on some nights, they just, they're done for the night. They will not be able to get back to sleep. They're too activated. They'll be pacing back and forth. They're starting with some other activity and that'll just, they'll just stay with that and just not sleep anymore. But usually, they're going to be exhausted from those kinds of nights. The sleep was obviously non-restorative for them and they are going to need something to get through their day. It might be caffeine. It might be energy drinks. You find out what, what they're doing to stay awake. So there's difficulty with nightmares.

Now, the next thing that a lot of people don't ask about is disturbed awakenings without recalling any bad dream and this is very common. This may be more common than the nightmares. Indeed, they may be having a disturbed awakening every night, maybe even at the same time at 1 o'clock, 3 o'clock where they suddenly wake up. They, they may sit up in bed very alert and it's an unpleasant set of thoughts that they're having. They're anxious. They may be in a panic level of anxiety and call it a panic attack. They may be frightened. They may have thought they heard a noise. They may have to get up and see if there are any people in the window or even take a walk outside 'cause they thought they saw someone through the window maybe when they looked out there or maybe they're just disturbed because their trauma took place when, in the past when they were attacked when they were in bed. So just being in bed is a very anxiety-provoking situation for them with how they're feeling right now and they have to do something to try to calm down. So this is a key symptom of PTSD-related sleep problems that will be a candidate for our treatment of choice.

And the third sleep problem that we frequently hear about is sleep terrors. What are those? That's when you wake up-- I'm sorry. That's when you, in your sleep, you are thrashing about in bed, kicking your sheets all over. Your pillow may wind up on the floor or on the other side of the room. You may be vocalizing, yelling, screaming. You may be audible, content to what you're saying like no or, or get away or something like that. But you would have no memory of it. The only way you know about a sleep terror is if someone else like your bed partner observed it or heard it and they will typically try to wake you unless they've learned that if they do try to wake you and shake you, you wake up in a half-awake state and you still think you're, you're in your nightmare or you're in a very disturbed state so you may attack the person who's trying to wake you. That has happened. So they may be cautious about waking you but they certainly will be likely to report that this is happening.

So all of these are key symptoms of PTSD. By the way, those disturbed awakenings, studies have been done suggesting that, sleep studies where they find that people were actually having a nightmare prior to the disturbed awakening. They just don't remember it at all. So you can consider in people with PTSD a disturbed awakening equals a nightmare. So let's say they're having one nightmare a week that they're remembering and three other nights when they only had a disturbed awakening. Count that as four nightmares per week as your baseline amount. So in this review of the chart, of the graph of the algorithm, I have a little blue arrow pointing out to the sleep disturbance part that we have just talked about. So you need to see if they've had PTSD-related sleep disturbance which I've just articulated. So that concludes this section.

I will now give you the key points of it again. So in this algorithm, the first consideration in approaching the PTSD patient for possible psychopharm is whether sleep is disturbed. Insomnia though has a huge differential diagnosis. There may be several causes going on at once. Each will need appropriate evaluation and evidence-based treatment. But as for the PTSD, the great majority of PTSD patients have sleep problems. It's considered by many to be the core symptom area for this disorder. And we delineated four kinds of sleep problems – difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep due to nightmares, disturbed awakenings without recalling a dream and night terrors where the person becomes highly activated or maybe even vocalizing or screaming and yet has no recollection of it. You must ask about all these sleep problems. Any could be target for the recommended psychopharm of PTSD.

---

# VL109 - Section 4: 10904

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

The next section of this algorithm for psychopharm of PTSD is about the use of prazosin for PTSD-related nightmares, disturbed awakenings and sleep terrors. And I'm going to explain the rationale and the dosing strategies for men and women which are different. So in this particular section, I think we're going to be talking about the two most important things I have to say in the whole algorithm – first of all, recommending prazosin and when to use it and secondly, knowing how to dose it in accordance with the evidence base.

So we are recommending prazosin for the sleep problems. So what is it? It's a non-sedating alpha-1 antagonist. I mentioned the non-sedating because this is not a drug that knocks you out. It doesn't particularly help you fall asleep. Many patients may need something to help them fall asleep even though they are now sleeping through the night and not awakening due to the prazosin. So that's a key thing to understand about this product. 



So why of the various drugs in this class which includes prazosin, doxazosin, terazosin, why this one? Because it's the best at crossing the blood-brain barrier. It firmly and clearly does cross it. None of the others do. So what's the evidence base for its use? We now have 10 placebo-controlled trials that are in the literature of prazosin for sleep and other problems in PTSD. Seven of the se--, 10 were positive. That's a very impressive track record for a drug. We, we don't have many other drugs with that many positive studies as a percentage of the total that are done. Many of these studies that were positive had large effect sizes and I'll show you some of those.

Of particular interest perhaps is the most recent one, the 10th by Guo and colleagues in 2024. This was a study where they augmented people's antidepressant they were already on with prazosin for people with depression and trauma. It was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial finding that it worked for the prazo--, for the PTSD but also for the depression. There was significant improvement in depression versus placebo in this group. And this is something that we who use a lot of prazosin have suspected for a long time. We know that prazosin is not an antidepressant, nothing to suggest that in general. But in PTSD people who have secondary depression, it may be very helpful for that depression and this Guo study found that. Anyway, prazosin, it's generally well tolerated even at relatively high dose in the elderly. There was a, a review of aba--, in 2020 of use of the drug in various elderly people, not a controlled study, just experience, case series in the VA finding that older people can sometimes tolerate quite high doses.

A key predictor of who responds to prazosin who has PTSD is if they have high blood pressure and Dr. Raskind has dubbed that the adrenergic subtype of PTSD. Now, keep in mind, they may have had high blood pressure which has been treated by the time you see them. They may be on an antihypertensive med already or maybe two of them. And so their blood pressure now may be normal or even a little bit lowish if they've been aggressive with their antihypertensives. But this is a person with high blood pressure so it counts as the adrenergic subtype. It does mean though that when you add prazosin you may have to reduce or stop one or more of the other blood pressure meds to make room for the prazosin in there and not produce unwanted low blood pressure. There is a sig-- I'll be talking about side effects more later but there is a significant risk of syncope from low blood pressure. About 1% of people could get that but hopefully it can be prevented with appropriate cautioning of the patient to not leap out of bed in the morning or in the middle of the night when they might get up to urinate or otherwise and sit on the edge of their bed for half a minute. Be sure they're not going to be lightheaded. Stand up, do the same thing. Be sure they're not lightheaded rather than rushing off to the bathroom and starting to pee.

So prazosin. Now it, in the first four studies of prazosin, it had a remarkable good effect size but they were all tiny studies. I have a slide on it which I think you can see. And in these three studies, it shows the effect size by Cohen's d. Now, we're usually pretty happy in Psychopharmacology when we see an effect size of 0.5. That means it was 50%, it produces a 50% better response than the placebo. But look at these effect sizes that were achieved with prazosin in these first three studies. If, if it's over 1.0, we have it in red and that's where the biggest effect size was in the first study, the very first one over 20 years ago. Just 10 patients but these were the first people getting prazosin for their nightmares and it had an effect size of 1.9. Whoa! But notice that the day symptoms also improved significantly and then that was still in the second and third studies as well.

Now, in the fourth study also by Raskind's group in 2013, I like this study because it has a very clear-cut table in the study of how to dose it. I give a copy of this paper to every patient I treat with prazosin. I have an inch-thick stack of papers, copies of this paper. So I have plenty on hand to hand one over to the patient so that they can follow the dosage of their prazosin as it was done in the study where they had such good results. And also, they can see when and whether side effects came up, when and whether benefits came up. This was a little bit larger study with 67 people in it, a 15-week total, was mostly male veterans and 16% dropped out from both the placebo and prazosin groups. Anyway, the results on this study were Clinical Global Impression of Response scores showed 64% responders on prazosin, 27% on placebo, number needed to treat 2.7. That's a fabulous number needed to treat, by the way. We're, we're very happy when we have 4, 5, 6. I mean, for example, the ve--, the very best of all the studies for bipolar depression has a number needed to treat of 4. That's the best. Everything else is less than that, higher numbers. Number needed to treat of 2.7 means you have to treat 2.7 patients before you're going to see one whose improvement that occurs is due to the prazosin and not due to placebo nor did they fail to respond. But all other outcome measures beside number needed to treat strongly favored prazosin. There was no difference in blood pressure. Two placebo patients became suicidal.

Now, the next and fifth study though was negative and it was a large multi-center study headed by Raskind once again, found no efficacy. It's one of the three negative studies. So there has been a lot of head scratching about this. Do we think that it negates all the other positive data? No. It did show a need though to find predictors of response because some people don't respond clearly. And as I already mentioned, higher starting blood pressure predicts greater response. But in this study, the patients had normal blood pressure. They were selected for that. Suicidality is a pa--, possible predictor of poor response too. That wasn't particularly prominent in this study though.

And another reason why this study might have failed is that these were all sites that were big enthusiasts for prazosin because of their be--, following Raskind's data like we do in our VA although we didn't participate in this study. But we were one, we're one of other VAs that were very impressed with prazosin. So some of those other VAs were in this study. So it could be that they already treated all of their best patients and they had to dig deep into the barrel to find people who met the criteria and maybe that's why they weren't so responsive. Furthermore, they didn't allow them to have trazodone to help them fall asleep. If they were on it, they had to go off it. And probably, many wouldn't, of them would have been reluctant to do that 'cause they were, could not be promised that they would get any benefit on falling asleep from their prazosin. And furthermore, everybody in this study had psycho--, was not allowed to have any psychotherapy. That also probably led to a lot of people not volunteering. So it was a peculiar population, we think.

We think prazosin remains the best treatment that we have. And below this slide, I have a list of the other three positive studies that have come out since then. And just by comparison, I think it's good to compare these results which by the way had been meta-analyzed. There have been at least four meta-analyses of all the PTSD-prazosin studies including this negative one comparing the results with other drugs that we have for PTSD. All those meta-analyses, every one concludes that prazosin is the most effective treatment we have. So we remain in accord with all of them and enthusiastic about it.

And you should contrast that with sertraline which is one of the two FDA-approved SSRIs for PTSD. It's very interesting that this med has had two large randomized controlled trials in Veterans. Both studies were negative, found no difference from placebo. There were also two large unpublished civilian studies that are also negative. The drug got approval from submitting two studies in civilians. Over 3/4 of the study participants were women mostly with sexual trauma. I'm ready to agree that sertraline works for them. I don't know if it works for men or for veterans. And as a matter of fact, in the United Kingdom, sertraline is not approved for men with PTSD. It's only approved for women. They looked at the same data as the FDA and they said, well, you know, I don't see why we should be approving it for men. There's just nothing positive. They thought it was more an issue of gender rather than whether they were veterans as to why, when sertraline was not working. I see tons of people prescribing sertraline for men with PTSD. I urge you to give that second thought if you're one of the people doing that and do consider prazosin if you haven't considered it yet.

Now, the last thing in this section is the dosing shown in the next slides. And this is the dosing from that 2013 Raskind study that had excellent results. So why not use their dosing protocol? I see no reason to make up one on your own. Why would anyone do that? Well, I see people doing it all the time. They come up with dosing strategies that are completely idiosyncratic and have no basis on, in relation to what's actually been studied.

Are you hearing my phone ringing?

That's, you know, my, I should've turned off my printer which also rings when there's a phone call. I didn't think of that.

I'll start with the prazosin titration.

Tell me when to start.

So let me show you the dosing for prazosin titration. I take it from the 2013 Raskind study that I just showed you, the one that I give a copy of to everybody. And this is not followed by very many people. We had a study from one of our VAs in the United States where they looked at people's prazosin trials and they found that 90% of them were, were deemed inef--, inadequate in that the dosing was nowhere near the evidence-based dosing. So here is the evidence base dosing. They start with 1 mg of prazosin for two nights, then they do 2 mg for five nights to complete the first week. Then it's 4 mg for seven nights for the se--, next week, the second week. Then it's 6 mg for the third week, 10 mg for the fourth week, 15 mg for the fifth week. It comes in 2's and 5's by the way so we're switching to the higher size capsule as we're going up on dose. 20 was the maximum in this particular study. The mean, the median dose that reached maximum benefit that was tolerated by these veterans was almost 16 mg. That means that half of the people responded to a dose higher than that and half did well with less than that. My personal experience is that I see two groups of responders. Some seem to respond between 4 and 10 and others respond at 25 or 30. Most of the people I see responding are at the lower doses but I do see some at the higher doses.

Now, as part of that protocol, they also started a day dose of prazosin for the day symptoms. Usually, after two weeks, they were tolerating the two weeks' worth of increases at night so they then started them with 1 mg in the morning, typically midmorning. And then for the next week, they could go up to 2 mg and by weeks 5 or 6, they could get as high as 5. So that was the morning and night protocol. You may be interested to know though that there are case reports in the literature of patients being prescribed 30 and 45 mg, respectively, for two cases, tolerating it and finally doing well and staying well at those doses with a publication in a peer-reviewed journal by Koola and colleagues almost a little over 10 years ago.

Now, the dosing for women is slower. They don't seem to need as much and that's shown in the next slide. Here's the titration from Raskind for women. He does 1 mg for two nights again but then 2 mg for the rest of two weeks rather than one week. So 12 more nights of 2 mg. Then if they still are tolerating it and not having satisfactory results on their nightmares and disturbed awakenings-- And by the way, our goal is to have zero nightmares and disturbed awakenings. We want them to sleep like a baby through the night if we can get there. So then they go to 4 mg, 6 mg. 10 was the maximum in this study but the median dose was 7 for the women. And as far as the morning dose, between weeks 2 and 3, they would do 1 mg and then go to 2 for up to five weeks. We don't know why women seem to need less.

So that concludes this section on use of prazosin which I will now summarize the key points of. In this section, the evidence on prazosin was outlined. I gave you all the citations. There have been 10 placebo-controlled trials published of which seven were positive. Three meta-analyses, there are now four actually, have concluded that it's the best medicine available and far more impressive than the two FDA-approved SSRIs for PTSD, neither of which particularly help with sleep. Equally important to knowing about prazosin as a treatment is knowing how to dose it which it seems from published surveys, though I did not cite them, is rare. We presented the dosing used in successful studies and we urge clinicians to use this dosing as modified in the individual case though by side effects that may require you to slow down the titration or may in some cases make it impossible to use prazosin effectively. And if they're on other hen--, antihypertensives, you might have to reduce or cut them out. The dosing for men is generally greater than for women though there are exceptions. The woman, it was a woman that got the 45 mg in that Koola case that was published. And for men, in one of the major studies, the mean final dose was 16 at night, 5 in the morning. And in that same study, the mean was 7 at night for the me--, women and 2 in the morning. That completes the key points.

---

# VL109 - Section 5: 10905

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

We continue this presentation of an algorithm for the psychopharm treatment of PTSD and in this section, we're going to talk about the management of sleep initiation disturbances in PTSD, trouble falling asleep. We've extensively discussed the treatment of maintaining sleep with prazosin in the last section. So as you can see on the flow chart which is shown again in your slide set, we're at the point where you have someone who can't fall asleep. Now, they may have gotten there because that's their main problem or they may have gotten there because you treated their type--, their trouble staying asleep but they still have trouble falling asleep. So what do we recommend? Well, as you may recall from my bird's eye overview of this algorithm in the first section of this talk, we consider hydroxyzine our first line with trazodone a second line. And if prazosin worked for the nightmares and disturbed awakenings but initial insomnia is still present, again, hydroxyzine first, trazodone second. But we do have case series data on clonidine that make us want to consider it. So let's look at that data.

It's promising looking. This was a case series, retrospective chart review of 79 veterans in Chicago in a VA that were put on clonidine for their sleep problems due to PTSD. Looking at their CGI, Clinical Global Impression of Improvement, retrospectively in the chart review, it looked like 72% had met the criteria for improvement. They were either much improved or very much improved by the CGI. Whereas, there was no placebo control unfortunately. So we don't know how placebo would've done. There were also minimum side effects reported. We know that the author of that study, Burek, is conducting a placebo-controlled trial right now. He's recruiting patients into it to see if we can have the first placebo-controlled trial of clonidine for sleep problems in people with PTSD. Now, I know that there's a lot of clinicians out there that are using it now before prazosin. I don't know why they're doing that. It's got zero controlled studies. Why would you use that first when we have something with 10 placebo-controlled tra--, trials of which 7 were positive. And furthermore, clonidine is a strong antihypertensive, much stronger than prazosin. With prazosin, you develop tolerance to the hypotensive effects actually usually within a week or two. It's really worthless as an antihypertensive. It was marketed for that a long time ago but rapidly found to not sustain its benefit for blood pressure. We are not using it at all for high da--, blood pressure anymore but clonidine is a highly effective treatment. So you're going to be giving people more blood pressure problems than they need to have and yet the drug has no evidence in the form of any placebo-controlled trials.

This is an example of how we try to construct our algorithms. We, we go by what has the best studies. And for that reason, clonidine is, is an also-ran in the options. But still, we're very interested to see what Burek is going to find in his controlled study and we also heard from Burek, he told us about a study in England where they are currently recruiting patients to a PTSD study using clonidine. So maybe we'll have two controlled studies soon and we may elevate clonidine in the algorithm to somewhere. We'd love to have a head-to-head trial though with prazosin to see which is more effective and which has the least side effects. We probably won't get that anytime soon though.

Anyway, the suggested dose of clonidine from the Burek retrospective experience-based data is 0.1 mg to 0.2 mg at bedtime which I understand he raises up to as high as 0.5 mg if tolerated. And then he also gives some in the daytime in their clinic, 0.05, in other words half of a 0.1 mg tablet up to three times a day as needed for PTSD day symptoms. And there have been some clinicians there that have tried the clonidine patch to give them more control of the input of the clonidine during the course of the day. The experience of Burek is that it is helpful for falling asleep unlike prazosin seems to be as well as maintaining them. So that concludes this short section on the alternatives for treating sleep.

The key points are: In this short meeting, we covered problems with falling asleep. That may be the main problem or it could be a residual problem after you have successfully treated problems staying asleep with prazosin because prazosin is not sedating and has minimal benefit for falling asleep. Be sure you've assessed, by the way, the multiple other causes of difficulty falling asleep. One of which is conditioned insomnia. Conditioned insomnia is when you once had something causing you great difficulty sleeping like nightmares. And now, you--, one of the reasons you have trouble falling asleep is you fear you'll have a nightmare. So you're afraid to sleep or you're just afraid even without it being a nightmare, just the whole experience of tossing and turning. It can be a trauma so that e--, even though we've fixed what caused it, you're still worried that you won't fall asleep and you'll be looking at the clock. Gee whiz, what time is it now? Oh my, it's now 1 o'clock. I got to get up for work. Oh no, now, it's 1:30. So you're worrying. This is called conditioned insomnia. The best treatment for that is cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, CBT-I, where you teach the patient how to think of other more relaxing things than these worries that they won't be able to fall asleep. That is better than adding more pills to try to knock them out and try to put them under general anesthesia or something like that so that they fall asleep which is what I see some clinicians doing. What they really need is CBT-I for the conditioned insomnia remaining component of their problems.

Anyway, so what do you use though for falling asleep? Given that we prefer to employ meds that have the best evidence or some evidence at least like we do in all our algorithms, that's why we picked hydroxyzine because there is a study by Ahmadpanah finding it effective. And after that, we suggest trazodone which has essentially no significant study in PTSD but is very widely used. It does seem to help people fall asleep. It does not usually help though with nightmares and disturbed awakenings. I see that all the time. They're falling asleep with their trazodone but they get the nightmares anyway. By the way, I hear about the same thing from cannabis. A lot of people with PTSD are smoking cannabis to help them fall asleep but they'll have the nightmares anyway. So it isn't helping with that. They may smoke, smoke another joint when they wake up with nightmares to, to fall back asleep. I'll be talking about the evidence on, on cannabis in one of the later, the final section, I think. And then I talked about clonidine as a promising option that's more sedating than prazosin and probably helps people fall asleep better. So that could be a third option. And I have already described the published series of 79 patients given clonidine where 49% were rated as much or very much improved on the CGI.

---

# VL109 - Section 6: 10906

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

In this section, we're going to talk about undesirable initial choices for sleep management in PTSD. I already in the last section described prazosin and the other meds which we think have an evidence base and seem reasonable as first, second, third-line treatments for various aspects of sleep management but I want to devote some time to things we think you should not use but which lots of people are using from what we see in our consulting practice. Undesirable initial choices for sleep in people with PTSD. Now, sometimes, it's, these things are chosen 'cause you didn't accurately diagnose that the sleep problem is due to PTSD. You thought it was something else and you gave some of these other things and then later you discover that they have PTSD as the likely cause of their sleep problems so that may be why they're on some of these. But anyway, assuming you know it's PTSD, why would you not use these seven treatments I'm going to mention?

The first is tricyclics. Actually, the first study in the, in the US of a drug that they, the first study for PTSD was with amitriptyline. So that's a tricyclic, a very sedating one that people thought might help and it actually did beat placebo as a treatment for PTSD but it had all of the usual extreme side effects associated with tricyclics. Amitriptyline probably had more than most, than really all the other. The side effects, it's got the most anticholinergic, the most alpha-adrenergic stimulation problems. It causes sexual side effects. It's got o--, excessive sedation, arrhythmias, etc. We don't think it deserves priority over anything we're talking about. More likely though today, you might think of doxepin which has a new, expensive brand version in very low doses. I don't see-- The only thing it's been used for is primary insomnia. There's zero evidence, not even case reports of using it in PTSD. I don't see any reason to use it. And then there are other tricyclics that have not been found useful for PTSD that include imipramine and desipramine.

Now, next in the list is quetiapine. I'm going to show you a whole slide on that so I'm just going to skip by it right now but it's one of the undesirable choices. Next, we have benzodiazepines. Why are they undesirable? Well, first of all, the one that has actually been studied, only one has had a study in PTSD and that is alprazolam. It used to be called Xanax which happens to be, by the way, worldwide the most frequently prescribed benzodiazepine. It's been generic for a long time, of course. But anyway, it has one study in PTSD and did not beat placebo. Okay. So nothing positive there. Now, another problem with them though is benzodiazepines have a very high potential for abuse when prescribed to patients with PTSD according to a large survey. So they take it, it may seem to work but now you can't get them off it. It stops working and they're taking more and more and you have a big problem. So it's better not to start it. And then here's another bad thing. It may reduce short- and long-term effectiveness of exposure therapy. Now, remember, wer--, this is only an algorithm for when and how to use meds but you may also be giving psychotherapy, you or whoever you're collaborating with in your team. And do you want to pull the rug out from under them by making their treatment less effective? That's what benzos do. They don't remember what they learned from those sessions. So these are all reasons not to use them.

Now, there was a flurry of interest in eszopiclone. It used to be called Lunesta in the United States. It's now generic though. Lunesta, eszopiclone, which is a derivative of zopiclone which is available in Europe for a long time before eszopiclone came out, it's one of an--, it's an enantiomer of the racemic compound. It had a positive study in PTSD back in 2011 but then enthusiastic about that the drug company sponsored a larger study which was published in 2020 finding absolutely no benefit to eszopiclone for PTSD symptoms. So we don't recommend that.

But I promised you a whole slide on quetiapine, why we don't think you should use it. Well, there was a NICE review of all the uses of quetiapine as a hypnotic in general and the review concluded, by Byers, concluded that, I'm sorry not by Byers, by Wine and colleagues concluded that its benefits did not justify its considerable risks and it should be, not be used as a first-line treatment for any kind of insomnia. We agree. It has a lot of side effects. Of course, there is the weight gain. I don't know if everyone's aware that the weight gain in quetiapine is not dose related. You're as likely to get it on 25 or 50 mg as you are at the higher doses. There's even some im--, there's some impression that you may have less weight gain when you go to full mania doses like 400 than when you use it for sleep at 25, 50, 75, 100. And what happens is you get the so-called Seroquel munchies. That is a term offered to me by one of my patients. I loved it so I've been mentioning it since to many other patients. And boy, have I seen a lot of head nodding when I describe the sup--, proposed syndrome of Seroquel munchies which is after you take it, maybe a half hour later you are ravenously hungry. And you have to go to the kitchen to eat something, maybe a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, maybe two peanut butter and jelly sandwiches like one of my patients said he needed in order for him to get back to bed and now he could fall asleep. They also seem to eat more during the day. So this is one of the causes of weight gain, the so-called munchies.

And finally, there are some dose-related cardiac side effects, QT prol--, prolongation and there's been an addition to the package insert warning about this back in 2011 and they list 12 drugs that you should not combine with quetiapine, all of which prolong QTc. So they say you should avoid all those. And finally, there is a risk of tardive dyskinesia with an antipsychotic. So if you don't need one and you got other reasonable alternatives and I think we've given you those alternatives, you would want to avoid it. The risk with quetiapine may be less than other second-generation antipsychotics. It hasn't been proven. Overall, there's about a 2.5% per year risk of TD from the second-generation drugs compared to the first-generation drugs like haloperidol, perphenazine. The risk of TD per year in them is something like 6.5% per year. It's less but certainly a finite number with the SGAs. And I did tell you about a citation by Byers which I show you just below on this slide. Byers compared the side effects and tolerability of prazosin and quetiapine in his VA, used some 15, 20 years ago. He found that quetiapine had a mean dose of 64 compared to prazosin that had a mean dose of 3. There was way more discontinuations due to side effects statistically significantly more from the quetiapine than from the prazosin. All right.

So that's a completion of the review of all of the drugs I think you should not use. And what's going to happen next in the algorithm is that you have now completed the assessment and management of sleep difficulties. So we're going to assess whether there are now significant remaining PTSD symptoms because treatment of their sleep effectively may have given this, them a quality of sleep which enables their daytime symptoms to be much more mild and maybe not in need of treatment But if so, if still in need of treatment, we're going to go on to meds that address the general symptom cluster of PTSD and SSRIs will be first line for that in our next section.

But to summarize the key points of this section, we see many people making bad choices for treating sleep problems in PTSD, maybe in many cases 'cause they didn't know it was PTSD they were treating. Anyway, once again, diagnosis of the causes of the insomnia is critical. Tricyclics are one of the treatments we do not recommend. They have no known efficacy, doxepin in low doses, for example, or they have much more side effects though they are possibly effective. That would include amitriptyline and I guess quetiapine. And benzodiazepines have no known efficacy, often produce dependency and have other important side effects. I had a whole slide on quetiapine which seems to be an all-purpose hypnotic prescribed by clinicians out there but has many side effects especially weight gain even at low doses and oversedation and should be avoided as a hypnotic until other reasonable options have been tried.

---

# VL109 - Section 7: 10907

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

This is the next section of the algorithm for psychopharmacology in PTSD. We've completed the assessment and management of sleep problems connected with the disorder. So now, we're going to move on to management of the non-sleep symptoms, generally the daytime symptoms and start with node 3 of the algorithm which is the first med to be used for the other symptoms which is an SSRI. As I mentioned earlier in this series of sections on this algorithm, the two FDA-approved meds for PTSD in the United States are paroxetine and sertraline but the evidence for all SSRIs is weak. Overall, effect size, standardized mean difference from placebo in a meta-analysis is 0.23. That's a very small effect size. It roughly translates into meaning that the drug was 23% better than the placebo. So for that small effect size, you get a fair amount of side effects. Insomnia is actually a side effect of SSRIs and SNRIs too. Sexual dysfunction though is probably the most common side effect affecting anywhere from 30% to 60% of people. Difficulty ejaculating, difficulty getting an erection, having an orgasm, difficulty with arousal, libido are all affected in certainly many, if not most, people given an SSRI. And there are also side effects related to its anticoagulant effect. Gastrointestinal bleeding can be nine times more common in people who are treated with an SSRI if they're on another drug like an NSAID like Motrin, ibuprofen, at the same time that they're also on their SSRI. Anyway, so benefits versus side effect risk is not that wonderful for this class of drugs despite the FDA approval.

And as I mentioned in an earlier section, sertraline is actually only approved for women in the United Kingdom. They looked at the evidence and saw that there were these negative studies with male combat veterans. It's never beaten placebo as a treatment for VA males. VA actually, VA subjects in total 'cause it's mostly males that were studied. And it has not ever beaten placebo for them. So the UK looked at that data and thought, well, you know, maybe it's a gender issue rather than an issue of whether you were a veteran. So they only chose to approve it in women but the US FDA generously approved it for all genders because the original studies, the two that were submitted for their approval were in civilians and they were mostly in women, mostly women with sexual trauma. I think sertraline probably does work for them but not for men apparently. So the evidence base is just not that great but still we would recommend you trying an SSRI.

By the way, I can graphically show you thanks to my co-author, Dr. Bajor, on our original study and she also composed some of the slides. So she created this graph showing where sertraline, paroxetine and fluoxetine, if you're interested in that one, what kind of data, a National Institute for Clinical Excellence study from the UK found for the effect sizes of these three SSRIs for PTSD. The best was paroxetine at 0.41. Fluoxetine ranged from 0.2 to 0.28, 0.02 to 0.28 putting it a little less than that. And sertraline because all of those negative male studies, if you add up all the studies, you get 0.6--, --06 to 0.26. And the NICE Guidelines consider an effect size of 0.5 or greater to be clinically meaningful and 0.8 to be clinically important. So none of the SSRIs met their threshold for clinical meaningfulness. And in the next slide, if you had, if you put the prazosin results that I showed you in one of the earlier sections, many of the results in those early studies had an effect size of 1 or more, 1.0. The group in England, NICE group did not evaluate prazosin. Most of the studies were not out yet when they did this study of the effect sizes. So they didn't know what was going to happen with prazosin. But if you were to put those early prazosin studies on to this graph, look where it would be compared to the SSRIs. So I've already discussed prazosin in, exhaustively so I won't dwell on it anymore.

But back to the SSRIs, so we did recently review to see if we could find any o--, anything relatively new since these earlier evidences were negative shown in this slide here, the FDA-approved SSRIs, the older evidence including in this table three large unpublished negative studies that were in a review by Hoskins of paroxetine and sertraline, one in vets and two in mixed trauma cases, all negative. So we looked for newer studies. We found nothing new on treatment of PTSD with fluoxetine, citalopram or escitalopram. We did find one small sertraline study in 65 Chinese civilians with positive results. So basically, that's the story on SSRIs. I wanted to cover them in a full section because they're the main treatment recommended by lots of other people.

So to reiterate the key points. In this section, we focused on the use of SSRIs for the remaining PTSD symptoms after you've treated any sleep problems with prazosin or our other suggestions. And my point here is that this evidence is surprisingly weak especially when you compare it with the prazosin evidence. And it's also, I wanted to make the point that it seems to be not widely known, not in the United States and in, not in many other countries beside the UK that sertraline has not been found effective for men in PTSD. But despite these negatives, we do recommend trying an appropriately selected SSRI at this point. I suppose it could be escitalopram though it doesn't really have any real evidence but it's a good SSRI, well tolerated by a lot of people. Maybe it would work. So that's our first choice.

Yes.

---

# VL109 - Section 8: 10908

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

This is a continuation of the algorithm for psychopharmacology of PTSD and in this section, we're going to discuss what to do if a patient has been treated with an SSRI at the point in the algorithm where we recommend that and they have psychotic symptoms connected with their PTSD. So to begin, I show you the flowchart again and I have got a blue arrow showing you where we are in the algorithm. They had been given an adequate trial of an SSRI and their response was either no response or they had a partial response to the SSRI and they have psychosis. And we have the psychosis here because PTSD-related psychotic symptoms actually might respond to the SSRI but if they haven't or nothing, there was no response of anything, we are going to tell you what we think is best.

But first, I just want to tell you a little about, give some examples of PTSD-related psychotic symptoms that I've heard about or that have been described in the papers on this. The Yale group has been particularly interested in, under Mark Hamner in this subgroup of PTSD people who have psychosis. So examples would include hearing soldiers screaming. For example, you might have been on the duty to have to pick up dead bodies of soldiers in Afghanistan or their body parts and put them in bags and take them back to the base. And while you were there doing that, some other soldiers might have been alive and screaming in pain and others were tending to them. So this is the kind of traumatic experience you can have in war, in a war ex--, role. And would it surprise you that such people might have auditory hallucinations later of hearing those soldiers screaming in pain on the battlefield or wherever it was they were hit by a roadside bomb maybe? Another example is you've been attacked and assaulted as your trauma and you may have visual hallucinations, flashbacks. They're like flashbacks to this attacker being about to attack you again. Also, you might have non-bizarre delusions that relate specifically to your trauma somehow of involvement with a, a dangerous situation that is not bizarre. Usually, the bizarre delusions are connected with primary psychotic disorders. You can get paranoid delusions but usually they're not associated with a flat affect or disorganized thinking that would be part of schizophrenia.

So what do we have for studies of this condition? Well, actually, the best evidence is with risperidone. That has open-label report by Dr. Hamner and another one by Rothbaum and colleagues. Oh no, I'm sorry. Hamner did an open-label report but Rothbaum and colleagues, I think maybe Hamner was part of that or, or the senior author in the Rothbaum--ait a minute. Does it show that on your slide? Let me scroll down to it. It looks like I don't show that. Okay.

So there's this placebo-controlled trial. Quetiapine has had open-label data, olanzapine open-label data. The quetiapine data though is worth talking a little bit more about. There was this study by Villarreal in 2016 where they found significant improvement in global PTSD symptoms especially re-experiencing and hyperarousal clusters and depression and anxiety and positive effect on psychosis but not any negative symptoms. So that is a positive study but they were a mixture of people, some of whom were psycho--, had positive psychotic symptoms and some did not. So it isn't parsed out whether it was only the psychotic people that got these improvements. So in other words, quetiapine has some reasonable evidence in this rece--, Villarreal sta--, study for being a good choice. Villarreal also had monotherapy data and the way they dosed it was to start with 25 mg but they did go as high as 800.

Now, one always wonders in any double-blind studies of quetiapine whether the blind was successful. The obvious side effects of sedation and those munchies I've talked about in previous sections of this lecture make it easy to know if you were randomized to it. At least, we think it would make it easy to know. However, in these studies, most studies with quetiapine do not ask the patients, the subjects whether they thought they were on the quetiapine or not and then match that up with what they actually got. Researchers hate to do that because if they found that people could predict and know what they were on it might invalidate the study. So we don't know if people knew whether they were on quetiapine or whether they got the placebo.

Anyway, Villarreal also had monotherapy data and the way they do--, dosed it was to start with 25 mg but they did go as high as 800. So in short, quetiapine can be effective in PTSD symptoms especially the re-experiencing and hyperarousal clusters and insomnia although with potential side effects. And also, quetiapine has unique effects on dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine receptors, neuropeptide Y and CRH that could explain benefits on PTSD. Also, alpha-1 antagonism may help with sleep and nightmare difficulties. So quetiapine is a treatment for PTSD without a doubt, it just, and even possibly for psychotic symptoms.

So we've got risperidone, we've got quetiapine for psychotic symptoms. But what about aripiprazole? Well, the evidence on risperidone and quetiapine are stronger but in general, it has few--, fewer side effects than those two drugs. So if you're going to use an antipsychotic, what evidence do we have on aripiprazole for psychosis? Well, we had a retrospective chart review where it helped on PTSD clusters and depression severity when added as an adjunct. The other medications were held constant, it was started at 2 to 5 mg, titrated up to an average of 12.4 at the end and there were some improvements in some rating scales. There is an open-label trial of it prospectively where it was helpful in, in 10 patients, small. 

And there actually is a randomized controlled trial of quetia--, of aripiprazole for PTSD in 16 patients, hardly any. So it's not a big study. What did it show? Non-significant improvement in PTSD symptoms, depression and psychosis, non-significant, with adjunctive aripiprazole for eight weeks in this placebo-controlled trial. 

So when you add all those three studies up, you get a possible for aripiprazole but it does have less side effects. So what do we conclude? So we--, in these studies, aripiprazole monotherapy is effective in PTSD and comorbid depression in some veterans.

Naylor did a monotherapy trial with it, started with 5 mg, had a mean dose of 10 at final at week 8. It was well tolerated, reduced intensity and frequently--, frequency of sa--, side effects over time, akathisia being the biggest one. Non-significant improvement in PTSD though. There was also a study by Youssef, again monotherapy, flexible dosing, 5 to 30. Side effects included weight gain, concentration difficulties, akathisia, nausea and numbing and tingling. Significant improvement though on total CAPS scores which is a PTSD scale especially cluster B, especially, and also PANSS improved on all three scales. So that was basically a positive study in PTSD. PANSS which measures psychotic symptoms did improve on all three subscales. And a study by Richardson, the first one mentioned, adjunctive with other medications, the other medications were held constant, it was started at 2 to 5 mg, titrated up to an average of 12.4 at the end and there were some improvements in some rating scales.

So in conclusion, the key points of this section: Some patients with PTSD have psychotic symptoms. They are related to the traumatic events to, by definition. Rule out a primary psycho--, primary psychotic disorder and treat with an appropriate algorithm for that. So if they have psychosis, sometimes it will remit with an SSRI. If not, we recommend adding an antipsychotic. Risperidone has the best evidence in that it had, had a clear-cut randomized controlled trial focusing on this subpopulation exclusively. Quetiapine had an RCT with a more mixed population. Aripiprazole has fewer side effects, seems to probably work so we do favor it as the first antipsychotic to try for this point in the algorithm.

---

# VL109 - Section 9: 10909

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

We continue with discussion of the psychopharmacology algorithm for PTSD and at this section we're going to discuss the situation where you have given an adequate trial of an SSRI and it did not work. You also earlier on had tried prazosin for any sleep problems they might have. This is what we call node 4 in the algorithm and it's depicted in the slide you're looking at now which is the flowchart of the second half of the algorithm. They've had an adequate trial and they did not respond. It was not someone who had psychosis. We already discussed that in the last section. So you've given an adequate trial. What are you going to do for your next trial. And to anticipate it, I have another blue arrow in there that, what if they didn't respond to the second trial? What would you give for the third trial?

So for the second trial, you could use another SSRI that you didn't use before. We did discuss those various options extensively earlier. But now, for the second trial of a non--, that's not prazosin for the sleep and it's not an SSRI if you don't do, want to do any of those, you could consider an SNRI. And we have two that have some evidence – venlafaxine and duloxetine. So what can we ha--, what do we have to say about those? Venlafaxine in summary has evidence for re-experiencing and avoidance but it has not been helpful for hyperarousal, insomnia or nightmares maybe because venlafaxine has this noradrenergic stimulation effect which is why we call it an SNRI, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. And you would think that something that stimulates norepinephrine is not going to be good for PTSD. And indeed, it may be the reason that venlafaxine did not help hyperarousal or insomnia or nightmares. It had some help for other symptoms though and you've already tried our best treatments for those nightmares and for the other symptoms in an SSRI. So maybe you want to try it now. Duloxetine similarly was helpful for overall PTSD, was helpful for depression associated with PTSD and anxiety but no help for nightmares. Keep in mind that people with high blood pressure, maybe issues with treating with an SNRI. So given their inferior effect on hyperarousal and sleep problems, we see no reason to refer--, to prefer an SNRI over an SSRI for first-line use.

So as far as the specific studies, there was a study by Sonne et al. Sertraline was compared with venlafaxine in a refugee population. It was started at 37.75 mg and ended at a mean dose of 125. The sertraline was at 25 to 50 and ended at a mean dose of 96. The venlafaxine performed equivalent to the sertraline in improving PTSD and depressive symptoms on the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire but sertraline was significantly better on the Sheehan Disability Scale. So this is why-- One of the, a little more about the evidence for why we think of it as second line. Duloxetine in a monotherapy trial was started at 30, got to a maximum of 120, PTSD symptoms improved, Hamilton-A improved, rapid onset of action but there was no reduction in nightmares.

Now, you may be wondering about mirtazapine. That's another dual-action agent. Maybe you want to consider it here at node 4 for your second antidepressant-type drug to use after your initial SSRI. And what we think is maybe you could use it as an augmentation because there is a study combining mirtazapine with sertraline improving PTSD and depressive symptoms, actually two studies of that. Also, there's another study where the combination of mirtazapine and paroxetine produced a faster response. However, there's a mirtazapine monotherapy study for PTSD showing no difference from placebo. However, there was a little bit of help for sleep quality even though it showed no overall benefit for placebo, for the sleep-- I'm sorry. It showed no overall benefit for the PTSD. So we don't have it earlier in the algorithm than now but you could consider it as a choice here at node 4 when you've already tried one drug.

Now, moving on. I think I've concluded this section, this short one and I'll reiterate the key points. A downside of SNRIs is that perhaps due to their noradrenergic effects they have no benefit for hyperarousal symptoms which are very common and problematic for PTSD patients. Another downside of SNRIs is that perhaps due to their noradrenergic activity--

Oh. I just realized I've repeated two key points here. Can we stop the--

Okay.

And the final key point is that many clinicians think of trying mirtazapine because of its sedating properties. However, as a monotherapy, it has not beaten placebo in the one trial that we have available. There is some weak evidence it can be combined with an SSRI to add small overall benefit.

---

# VL109 - Section 10: 10910

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

We continue the discussion of the algorithm for the psychopharmacology of PTSD and we have gotten to the point where you have tried two SSRIs or an SSRI and an SNRI and we call this node 5 of the algorithm. I showed it to you in a flowchart in the previous section and I did not reprint the flowchart for this section. But basically, I said before that after you have had one adequate trial of an SSRI, you could try a second one or you could try one of two SNRIs that have evidence, namely, venlafaxine and duloxetine. But neither work very well for hyperarousal. We also discussed mirtazapine in that last section.

So in this section which is a very short one, we're now offering you a third trial, what you might consider for the third trial after you've tried two antidepressants. So here, we have a very simple set of options for you. You could either try another SSRI or another SNRI that you haven't tried yet. Those options are still available to you or you could try prazosin during the day if you never tried it before. 



Now, I had mentioned in earlier sections when I was going over prazosin in detail that some of the earlier trials with prazosin, namely, the first among the first four trials also used it as a treatment for their PTSD during the day, not just at night. And in those four trials, I showed you the evidence that it could be quite effective for day symptoms. Now, more recently though, a large meta-analysis of day symptom treatment with prazosin found minimal benefit but those studies that were reviewed in this very recent meta-analysis included the very large negative study that had all kinds of flaws that I mentioned earlier in one of the previous sections. But yet, they included that. And looking at night symptoms, that review concluded like other reviews that prazosin is highly effective and is probably the best treatment we have for sleep. But if you're going to consider it for day symptoms, they thought that it was barely effective. However, a review by Hendrickson and colleagues in 2021 just of those first four studies before the really big negative study found impressive benefit for day symptoms.

So given all of that, we thought this is the right spot to propose prazosin during the day for your patient who has not responded to two previous SSRI or SNRI trials. They're still having a lot of daytime hyperarousal and irritability symptoms when they get triggered by things that upset them and hypervigilance in various settings like restaurants and crowds. They may still be very impaired by those symptoms and they're isolating themselves at home. They don't even want to go to a supermarket because they think there might be, as they walk through the aisles, they worry about some bad guy might be around the corner in the next aisle ready to shoot them 'cause that's what they had to deal with when they went in to buy any groceries or other provisions they needed in stores in Afghanistan or Iraq. So they've continued with that hypervigilance in supermarkets in the United States and don't want to even go to a supermarket 'cause they have so much anxiety. So prazosin may be just the thing for the anti-adrenaline effect to bring down that anxiety. And that's what seems to be the case in the first four studies reviewed by Hendrickson. So we think this would be the place you might consider daytime prazosin. Now, you might have tried it way, a long time ago. We--, when you got such great results from your night prazosin for sleep, you might have thought to try some during the day just like they did in the Raskind 2013 study of which I give a copy to every patient when I'm treating them with prazosin. In that study, they gave daytime prazosin. So you might have done that too and already tried it but maybe not in the doses used in the 2013 Raskind study. If you didn't do that, this would be the time to do it.

Now, one more thing you might consider trying though at this point in the algorithm is clonidine because I discussed clo--, the clonidine reviews, retrospective review studies that have been published by Burek. I discussed them in a previous section. And those clonidine studies did use it during the day as well as at night. So I think that's an option too here in node 5 where you've already tried two SSRIs, you've tried prazosin for the night symptoms and you're wondering what's left. You could try clonidine now.

So that's what we recommend here in this short section, node 5 of the algorithm and I'll reiterate it with a few key points. In this very brief section, we discussed what you might do for a third trial of a full spectrum PTSD medication when you've already tried two of them. You could use any of the options already mentioned for the first and second trial that has not yet been tried among the SSRIs and SNRIs. And then also, the anti-adrenaline agents that were discussed in detail in the beginning of the algorithm for managing insomnia can certainly be considered now for daytime use if this wasn't tried before when you were using them for sleep. Prazosin works very well at least in some of the trials and clonidine might work well.

---

# VL109 - Section 11: 10911

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

We continue with the algorithm for the psychopharmacology of treatment, psychopharmacology of PTSD. We are now at node 5A which is, what do you do if you have tried the various treatments we've suggested for the full syndrome of PTSD having already treated sleep with prazosin and you haven't had any success with your SSRIs, your SNRIs, your clonidine, your prazosin if you've used them for day symptoms as well? So in this point, you may be wanting to add an augmentation or you're wondering what else is out there for the treatment-resistant case. And we have a table that we offer you now for everything else we could come up with that has some evidence.

So focusing on that table, I have some comments on each of these options. So at the top left of the table, we have valproic acid. We have mood stabilizers in general, a list of six of them headed by valproic acid. Now, it's my experience as a consultant that valproic acid or valproate or Depakote or divalproex that this is a, the go-to treatment out there for agitated, irritable people. No matter what's causing it, you might try valproic acid for it. I think this evidence is pretty unconvincing in the case of PTSD at least because we have two placebo-controlled randomized trials by Davis and Hamner. Our friend, Hamner was in on this one too to try Depakote. And the result in both of those studies was no efficacy versus placebo for valproate for PTSD. So I see people using it. I don't think it has evidence so it's not anything we're excited about.

Lamotrigine, another anticonvulsant, that has one randomized controlled trial for PTSD that's 26 years old now. It had some evidence of working a little bit on some scales but not much. But we do think that if someone has got bipolar depression and they have PTSD, maybe this is a good drug that could possibly have some help for both. Next one is topiramate. Topiramate started out with two negative placebo-controlled trials but then Dr. Yeh and colleagues in Brazil in 2011 did a 12-week study. It was a pretty good size study with 70 patients and found a significant benefit. And we find that to be pretty impressive. It was statistically significant. The CAPS scores went down 58 points in the group getting the, the topiramate at a typical dose of 300 versus only 32-point drop, still a pretty robust drop, with a placebo. But that difference was quite significant, p 0.008. So I think topiramate has a ra--, a role here at the bottom of the algorithm. Levetiracetam, only open-label daba--, data. Tiagabine, same thing. Oh no. It has a placebo-controlled trial that was negative.

Gabapentin, now, there's something everybody is using for anybody who's anxious including people with PTSD. We looked all over to find something, some study. We couldn't find anything except two case studies where it seemed to work. So this is a definitely understudied interesting option but we couldn't put it anywhere higher in the algorithm because of just no study. 

Now, among antipsychotics, I did go through this evidence base in quite a bit of detail in an earlier node, an earlier section of this algorithm. We did lean toward aripiprazole. Ziprasidone has case study data only and olanzapine actually has an open-label study that was negative. Almost nothing has an open-label study that's negative but adding olanzapine, they were no better off at the end of getting it than when they started it. 

And as far as other agents are concerned, we have guanfacine which has two randomized trials, no difference from placebo. We have clonidine. I've told you a lot about clonidine already in previous sections. We have an MAOI. Phenelzine has a, two randomized trials for PTSD and the results were really equivocal. There were some aspects that improved. They have a lot of side effects of course. Can't get too excited about them. Doxazosin, there was a somewhat positive study in 2016 so that in our earlier version of our algorithm, the one we published in 2012, we recommended it as a possible alternative to prazosin. But then a large, 141-patient, controlled study came out in 2023 but these were people who were drinkers and they tried to treat the PTSD with doxazosin. Did not get anything from that. So we have dropped doxazosin from our drugs that we will try as an alternative to prazosin because of that study but we'll see. Maybe something more will come out that's more positive.

Now, there are some more options not in that table that I will conclude with. How about TMS, transcranial magnetic stimulation? How about cannabis? And how about ketamine and stellate ganglion block? Well, none we think have sufficient evidence to justify an earlier spot in the algorithm. And as far as cannabis is concerned, it has some evidence showing increased anger and irritability when used for PTSD. We have placebo-controlled trials though showing no benefit whatever for PTSD. I like to cite with patients who still believe in cannabis 'cause they're using it all the time. I like the study, cite this study by Bonn-Miller which I've offered you the citation for. They gave three concentrations of smoked cannabis to patients with PTSD in over 100 people in the, total in the trial. And these three concentrations, one had high THC, tetrahydrocannabinol which some people think is the important active ingredient; some had low levels of that and high CBD, cannabidiol, which others think might be important; and the third smoked product had high of both. And there was also a placebo smoked product. All three of the cannabis products had no difference from placebo on PTSD benefit.

So for those veterans and others out there that I see that are excited about cannabis and how it helps them for their PTSD, I think what it's doing is what, while they're taking it, while they're high from it, they feel more relaxed but when it wears off, their PTSD comes back full blown, if not worse with worse anger and irritability than they even had before the cannabis. That's what I think cannabis is doing for PTSD. And when I tell that to patients and give them a copy of this study, they often tell me, you know, doc, actually, I think you're right. I think that is what is happening in my case. So then you have the, the agreement with the patient that it's actually not helping them and you have the job of trying to help them get off it. Unfortunately, we have no proven treatment for how to help them with that but we do with the best we can to taper them. And often, what they really need is to go on something that actually works like prazosin. And if they find that that works, they feel confident that they can taper off or even just stop their cannabis.

So I am ready to give you my summary after all these references of the key points of this, of this section. And the key points are that I tried to cover as many alternatives of, as I can to our best recommended treatments that have the most evidence that I talked about over the previous sections. Notable in the table for the key points are the two negative placebo-controlled trials with valproate which seems to be used often. Also, note that we downgraded our support for doxazepin--, doxazosin as a much larger negative study was published in 2023. And then we discussed some items that are not officially in the algorithm anywhere. Cannabis is probably the most, most noteworthy of those since so many people think it works but the studies do not confirm this. And patients may be more relaxed while intoxicated with it and it may help them fall asleep too. But when it wears off, the rebound seems to worsen them at least temporarily and anger management actually may get worse and all these things make them want to use it more 'cause of the brief benefit. But we hope we have something better for them in the algorithm. TMS seems promising though. We're looking forward to seeing more evidence on it and it may have a role.

---

# VL109 - Section 12: 10912

## Faculty

**David Osser, M.D.**

## Transcription

Hello everybody! This is Dr. David Osser again from Needham, Massachusetts, from Harvard Medical School and the VA in Brockton, Massachusetts. I'm here to present the take-home messages on our algorithm for the treatment of PTSD with medication. I want to thank you for listening to the previous sections of this algorithm and putting up with my ranting and raving about my excitement or lack thereof for the various things that are out there for PTSD. And you've clearly had the patience to put up with that and hear my final take-home messages which I'm going to present now. And I really appreciate all of your interest in the talks that I've given for the Psychopharmacology Institute and lately for this particular talk. So here we go with our take-home messages, my summary and conclusions.

First of all, we, the authors of this algorithm especially Dr. Laura Bajor, the first author of our three publications of this algorithm, we proposed the first time we published it in 2011 that the first-line medication for PTSD featured by symptoms of nightmares and disturbed awakenings and other sleep problems related to PTSD, that the first-line medication for PTSD would be prazosin, before starting an SSRI which were the generally recommended first-line treatments for PTSD in just about all other guidelines and algorithms that were out there. It is now 2025 and we just published this year the latest update of this algorithm. And we recommend prazosin even more strongly than we did in 2011 based on a reasonable interpretation of considerable evidence now. We have 10 placebo-controlled trials now. We have seven of them being positive. We have four meta-analyses of these 10 trials that also include meta-analyses of other treatments for PTSD particularly for sleep, all concluding that prazosin is the best medication we have for this condition. 

So we are still enthusiastic and urging practitioners to use more prazosin and use it properly according to the evidence base of how to dose it which I presented in this particular talk. So those are the major take-home messages of this algorithm, that you should use prazosin.  Use it when indicated. Use it in adequate doses. The mean dose of prazosin, by the way, was 16 in one of the studies that we think was highly useful and which we actually hand to patients when we treat them with prazosin. 16 was the average final nighttime dose and 5 in the morning if you use it during that day in that study. So those are the major take-home messages.

There are other antiadrenergic agents out there that are promising. Clonidine is perhaps the most clo--, promising. I do see studies trying to evaluate if propranolol has a role. It does not seem to have a role as far as I can see so far based on what's been published although I see a lot of clinicians prescribing it over prazosin and clonidine. I think that's a mistake. You should go with the things that have the good evidence.

And then the other key point is that SNRIs and SSRIs have a role after the antiadrenergic treatments but their benefits are minor, small, maybe clinically important but not very much so.

And I'm also going to give you the key points of the take-home messages I just gave you because I just remembered that one of my teachers in college who taught me on how to give a lecture said that when you give a lecture, you should tell them what you're going to tell them. Then you tell them. Then you tell them you told them. So I'm doing that in this final section. So what I just told you was that the most important take-home message in this presentation is about prazosin. One, you should use it. It's our best medication for sleep problems in PTSD and perhaps also the best for daytime symptoms though that's less well established. Two, to get good results with prazosin, you must dose it as it was dosed in the successful studies. And few seem to know what the dosing protocol is. We hope you are taking home the correct dosing which is in quick summary 1 mg, for men, 1 mg for two nights, 2 mg for five nights to complete the first week. 4 mg for the second week. 6 mg for the third week. 10 mg for the fourth week. 15 mg for the fifth week which is where the average effective dose was. You may have to go more slowly than all that if you get any postural hypotension or dizziness but that's the standard dosing. And you can go as high as 20, 25 or even 30 and there's a case report in the literature of, believe it or not, 45 at bedtime.

Another key take-home message is that SSRIs even though two of them are FDA approved for PTSD are only very weakly effective. One of them, sertraline has never been found effectively--, to have efficacy in men. Few people seem to know this. The other, paroxetine is mild to moderately effective but paroxetine has more side effects than most other SSRIs like sexual side effects and weight gain. So we prefer escitalopram. And finally, an important key point is that cannabis is ineffective for PTSD and even harmful based on the evidence. Good luck convincing those many cannabis users out there who think it's the only thing that helps them. I've heard that from many people. I've also said that, heard people tell me that the only pleasure they get in life is from cigarettes, tobacco cigarettes. The only pleasure they get in life. I don't know how to help those people but I do try to persuade them to quit smoking anyway. But regardless of all that, people feel that cannabis is the only thing that helps them. They may also think alcohol helps them. So you've got work to do helping those people.

And that concludes this section. And thank you again for listening to all of these sections on the PTSD algorithm.

---
